All right guys.
Now we're going to talk about the position property which has to do with positioning elements in certain
places on the page.
So we're going to create a new file here called 11 underscore position dot h t AML and let's put in
our head body tags and for the title we'll just say CSX positioning and its two hour style tags.
And as far as the H team all goes I JUST WANT TO HAVE FIVE BOXES AND WE'RE GONNA format them to just
be square colored boxes and we want to.
We want to position them in certain ways so each one will have its own I.D. let's do box one.
But I also want them to have a class of box because that's what we're going to use to create the heightened
with and do five of these.
Okay.
So this will be box two three four and five and let's go up here and style the box class to have a width
of one hundred pixels and a height of one hundred pixels.
Now if I save this and we open this up it's gonna be blank because we have no backgrounds for these
boxes.
So each one will have a different color background so let's grab box one.
Let's give it a background of red and then I'm gonna just copy this down.
We have five of them and let's do box two three four and five.
So we'll do red yellow green blue and orange OK.
So let's save this.
And now everything by default has a position of static.
OK.
If I do a position position here and say static that's actually the default.
I'll save it.
It's the same.
Now I just want to show you a quick screen right here that has all the value the possible values of
position so static is the default.
And it's not affected by top bottom left and right properties in CSX we have properties where we can
let's say for top we want to move it from the top a certain amount of pixels or percentage.
We can do that but we can't do it if it's position static.
OK relative we can use these values top bottom left right.
And it'll cause them to be moved from their normal position.
OK.
Whatever whatever its normal position would be on the page if we can move it from that now absolute
is different because absolute it pertains to its parent element.
So if you have a parent like let's say a div that can do that that's surrounding other Divs.
You would make the inner divs absolute and the outer div or its parent relative and then you could position
it within that parent.
OK.
And I'm going to give you an example of that fixed is actually position to the viewport meaning the
whole browser window so it'll stay at that that place even if you scroll down or whatever and then sticky
is similar to fixed except you can stick it in a certain position like at the top.
OK.
When you're scrolling down if you want it to stay at the top you could use sticky and this is used a
lot for menus where you always want the menu to show at the top no matter what.
So you can navigate the site.
All right.
So it's I'm going to give you examples of all of these.
So we already looked at static.
That's just the default.
Let's change this to relative and since we we could we set it to relative.
We can actually use Top Right Bottom in left properties.
So let's say we want to push this let's say 50 pixels from the top and from the left we want to push
it 50 pixels and I'll save that.
And notice the red box has now moved 50 down and 50 over from the left.
OK.
And if if we didn't do position relative in a Save it doesn't it doesn't work.
So it's going to be from its from its natural place we can move it now absolute like I said has to do
with inside of a parent.
So Box 2 and 3 I'm going to make absolute but I'm going to put them within a container class or div
with the class of container.
And if there is no pat relative parent it's going to use just the body or the basically the whole browser
window here.
So let's do that now two and three which are the yellow and green are within the container.
So up here just so we can see the limits of the container.
Let's give it a width of 500 pixels a height of 500 pixels a background of dark gray.
And let's position it relative because remember the parent has to be position relative.
And I'll save that.
And there we go.
There's the container.
OK.
Now box one in box two are within the container.
But let's say we want to move it move want to move this one a hundred pixels down from the top and one
hundred pixels over from the left.
So if I go to Box 2 and I say top 100 pixels and left 100 pixels save it it doesn't move because it's
still static right now since I wanted to move 100 pixels down and out within its container I want to
set it to absolute.
So let's say position absolute and save.
And now you can see that it moved down a hundred pixels and over one hundred pixels within its container.
Now box 3 is also within the container.
So let's just copy this and let's do this time we'll do from the bottom right and save.
And now within its container it went from the bottom up a hundred pixels and from the right over one
hundred pixels.
So you can precisely put things wherever you want within you know position to absolute within a relative
container.
Hopefully that makes sense.
Now before you move on to fix I just want to mention something and that's the z index property.
Notice how Box 1 is behind the container.
So if I wanted to move this in front I could use the z index property.
So let's go to Box 1 which is our red box and let's add Z dash index and if we do just a value of 1
that should do it.
Let's save.
And now it's in front.
So the higher the z index then the closer to you it's going to be.
If I were to add to the container which is the big box if I add a z index here of 2 and save it goes
in front of the red box because obviously 2 is higher than 1 and you can also have negative values as
well.
Let's get rid of that we'll keep the red box upfront.
But I just wanted to mention that about z index.
All right so let's do fixed so box for let's say we want position to be fixed.
Now watch what happens when I save.
Watch what happens to the blue box or actually the orange box it seems to disappear but it didn't disappear
what happened is it's it's under the blue box because when it's fixed it's it's pulled out of the flow
of the document and put right on top.
OK.
And this would be the the next position after all this stuff.
Now if I were to scroll down you would see the orange box because the blue would just stay where it
is.
So let me give you an example of that.
We don't have enough content to scroll but if I just add a crazy height to the body we'll be able to
scroll down.
So let's just give the body height of like 4000 pixels and save.
Now you can see we have a scroll bar and as I scroll see the blue box just stays in a fixed position.
So that's what that's going to do.
So if you have a Web page where maybe you have like an ad or something that's really important that
you always want to stay on top.
You would use fixed for that.
OK.
And the next one I want to look at is sticky which is similar but you can actually have it stick in
a certain spot like let's say the orange box here we want it to stick to the top when we scroll down.
So for box five let's say position sticky and this is used a lot for menus because a lot of times you
want the navigation menu to stay at the top no matter where you are on the site now where we wanted
to stick is top zero.
So let's save that.
And now you'll see the orange one is on top of the blue and we can change that with the z index.
But let's scroll up and watch when I hit the top with the orange box it stays there.
I keep scrolling and it still stays at the top.
So it's really good from four top menus or navigation menus.
All right and just to show you box five is orange.
If I were to give this a z index let's actually give this a negative z index so negative 1 and save
and you can see it goes behind the blue.
So hopefully this gives you some insight on the different values for position as well as how z index
works.
Now positioning like this isn't used that much in in modern web sites and you eyes because responsiveness
and having your your layout look good on mobile devices is very important and when you do things in
this way it's not very mobile friendly.
OK.
Unless it's like part of a very small area and you have stuff positioned absolute within there that's
still going to look good on a mobile device.
But yeah I'd say this stuff isn't used as much anymore than it used to as it used to be.
All right so in the next video we're gonna start to look at form styling and I'm actually gonna give
this one to you guys as a challenge.
I'm going to give you some hints and I want you to try and style a form based on all the properties
that we've learned about so far.